Add `Releases, Versioning, and Public API` declaration section (#481)
ros-controls/control.ros.org: doc/governance/governance.rst

     - Marq Rasmussen
   * - https://github.com/ros-controls/.github
     - Not Yet Available

Releases, Versioning, and Public API
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
As ros-controls PMC is independent of the ROS PMC we thrive to follow `its strategy <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/The-ROS2-Project/Contributing/Developer-Guide.html#quality-practices>`__ but have to adapt
it according to our needs. This includes an asynchronous release cycle, where ros-controls claims to
have a stable release for a ROS distro on **1st of October after an official ROS distribution release**.

> But ros2_control packages may be available via the ROS build farm earlier than this date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is very likely that ros2_control packages will be available via the ROS build farm earlier than this date.
```

> The stable release, called **released ros2_control version** from now, will be announced on `ROS discourse <https://discourse.openrobotics.org/c/ros-controls/ros-controls-announce-news/107>`__ on time.

Author: suggestions for a better naming than `released ros2_control version`?

Reviewer: I think we should use a nomenclature of "the release has reached a stable state"

Versioning
~~~~~~~~~~

We will use the ROS-specific rules on top of ``semver's`` for versioning, but also adhere to some ros-controls-specific rules:

> * Major version increments (i.e. breaking changes) should not be made within a **released ros2_control version**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Major version increments (i.e. API breaking changes) should not be made within a **released ros2_control version**.
```
?

> * Major version increments (i.e. API breaking changes) should not be made within a **released ros2_control version**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Major version increments (i.e. API breaking changes) should not be made within a **released ros2_control version** of a ROS Distro.
```

Author: **released ros2_control version** is already only for a distinct ROS Distro. then we should clarify this above.

Reviewer 2: Okay

* ros2_control heavily relies on the usage of `pluginlib <https://index.ros.org/p/pluginlib/>`__. Therefore, we distinguish two types of compiled code: non-plugin code together with plugin base classes, and plugins itself.

  * ABI of plugins may change at every release, i.e., also within **released ros2_control version**. Typically, they are built by the buildfarm and not intended to be linked against your code.

>   * For non-plugin code, the ABI is considered part of the public interface. Any change that requires recompiling dependent code is considered major (breaking) and must not be made within a **released ros2_control version**.

Reviewer 2: In the last meeting, we said we still allow ABI from time to time as we have control critical code and ABI fixes can be crucial.

> Public API declaration

Author: I haven't changed this section from the ROS version. Open for discussion.

- Should we even install header files of plugins if we don't expect them to be API stable?
- Or install them, but clearly distinguish between public and private API?

Reviewer: good question! I think pluginlib doesn't require headers, only the XML files and the base classes (if custom)

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

According to ``semver``, every package must clearly declare a public API.
We will use the "Public API Declaration" section of the quality declaration of a package to declare what symbols are part of the public API.

> For most C and C++ packages the declaration is any header that it installs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For most C and C++ packages the declaration is any header that it installs.
```
do we really have C packages?

Author: We almost don't have public python API either.
But as I said above, this section is a 1:1 copy from ROS as a placeholder now and should be adapted/simplified/deleted.

However, it is acceptable to define a set of symbols which are considered private.
Avoiding private symbols in headers can help with ABI stability, but is not required.

For other languages like Python, a public API must be explicitly defined, so that it is clear what symbols can be relied on with respect to the versioning guidelines.
The public API can also be extended to build artifacts like configuration variables, CMake config files, etc. as well as executables and command-line options and output.
Any elements of the public API should be clearly stated in the package's documentation.

> If something you are using is not explicitly listed as part of the public API in the package's documentation, then you cannot depend on it not changing between minor or patch versions.

Reviewer 2: I like this part

Author: this was always there, we just never adhered to it :dagger:

Deprecation strategy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Where possible, we will use the tick-tock deprecation and migration strategy for breaking changes (API or behavior-breaking changes).

* New deprecations can be run-time messages or compiler warnings expressing that the functionality is being deprecated. The functionality will be completely removed in any future release, or at latest in the next **released ros2_control version** (there may be details in the deprecation note).

> * New deprecations can also come in every release of **released ros2_control version** by performing backports of any changes to the rolling version. But the deprecated functionality will remain available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* New deprecations can also come in every release of **released ros2_control version** by performing backports of any changes to the rolling version. These are meant to help users migrate early, however the functionality will remain available in that release.
```

Author: what do you mean with "release"? A release is a tag, pushed with bloom-release to the buildfarm.

Reviewer 2: May be he meant within the same ROS Distro version

> * New deprecations can also come in every release of **released ros2_control version** by performing backports of any changes to the rolling version. But the deprecated functionality will remain available.

Author: ```suggestion
* New deprecations can also come in every release of **released ros2_control version** by performing backports of any changes to the rolling version. These are meant to help users migrate early, however the functionality will remain available in that ROS distribution.
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
As ros-controls PMC is independent of the ROS PMC we thrive to follow `its strategy <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/The-ROS2-Project/Contributing/Developer-Guide.html#quality-practices>`__ but have to adapt
it according to our needs. This includes an asynchronous release cycle, where ros-controls claims to
have a stable release for a ROS distro on **1st of October after an official ROS distribution release**.
Releases of ros2_control packages will be **available** via the ROS build farm earlier than this date.
The stable release will be announced on `ROS discourse <https://discourse.openrobotics.org/c/ros-controls/ros-controls-announce-news/107>`__ on time.

We will use the ROS-specific rules on top of ``semver's`` for versioning., but also adhere to some ros-controls-specific rules:

* Major version increments (i.e. breaking changes) should not be made within a released ros2_control version (see above).

  * Patch (interface-preserving) and minor (non-breaking) version increments do not break compatibility, so these sorts of changes *are* allowed within a release.

* For compiled code, the ABI is considered part of the public interface.

>   Any change that requires recompiling dependent code is considered major (breaking).

Reviewer 2: Here we are claiming that we won't have any ABI changes. Am I right?

* For other languages like Python, a public API must be explicitly defined, so that it is clear what symbols can be relied on with respect to the versioning guidelines.

If something you are using is not explicitly listed as part of the public API in the package's documentation, then you cannot depend on it not changing between minor or patch versions.

Deprecation strategy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Where possible, we will use the tick-tock deprecation and migration strategy for breaking changes (API or behavior-breaking changes).

* New deprecations can be run-time messages or compiler warnings expressing that the functionality is being deprecated. The functionality will be completely removed in any future release, or at latest in the next **stable ros2_control release** (there may be details in the deprecation note).

* New deprecations can also come in every release of **stable ros2_control release** by performing backports of changes from the rolling version. These are meant to help users migrate early, however the functionality will remain available in that ROS distribution.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

The ros2_control maintainer team considers safety a top priority and bugs or issues found in the framework may be back ported to distros regardless of API stability.
These issues will be discussed at the biweekly PMC meeting where the community can decide the best route forward.

```

Reviewer 3: I think it would be a good idea to add a statement about bug fixes and back porting safety critical issues.

The solutions for handling X-turtle's version in such a case, both non-ideal, are:

1. Bumping X-turtle's minor version: non-ideal because it violates SemVer's principle that breaking changes must bump the major version.

2. Bumping X-turtle's major version past Y-turtle (to ``3.0.0``): non-ideal because the older distro's version would become higher than the already-available version of a newer distro, which would invalidate/break version-specific conditional code.

The developer will have to decide which solution to use, or more importantly, which principle they are willing to break.
We cannot suggest one or the other, but in either case we do require that explicit measures be taken to communicate the disruption and its explanation to users manually (beyond just the version increment).

If there were no Y-turtle, even though the fix would technically just be a patch, X-turtle would have to bump to ``2.0.0``.
This case adheres to SemVer, but breaks from our own rule that major increments should not be introduced in a released distribution.

This is why we consider the versioning rules *best-effort*.

> As unlikely as the examples above are, it is important to accurately define our versioning system.

Author: IMHO can be deleted and linked from our page.
